Add ios and macos tutorial (#50)
godot-rust/gdext-book: src/toolchain/export-mac-and-ios.md

<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) godot-rust; Bromeon and contributors.
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Export to macOS and iOS

Mac libraries that are intended to be shared with other people require Code Signing and Notarization. For this you will need:

- A Mac Computer
- An Apple ID enrolled in Apple Developer Program (99 USD per year)

> Without Code Signing and Notarization the other person can still use the built library, but either need to rebuild the whole thing locally or re-sign or accept that it may contain mallicious code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without Code Signing and Notarization, the other person can still use the built library, but either needs to rebuild the whole thing locally, re-sign it or accept that it may contain malicious code.
```

Prerequisites:

> - Download and Install [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) on Your Mac Computer

Reviewer: Capitalization: only beginning of sentences and proper names.
```suggestion
- Download and install [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) on your Mac computer.
```

## Building macOS universal lib

> Add as targets both x64 and arm64 targets. This is needed in order to create a universal build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add both x64 and arm64 targets. This is needed in order to create a universal build.
```

```sh
rustup target add x86_64-apple-darwin
rustup target add aarch64-apple-darwin
```

Build the library for both target architectures:

```sh
cargo build --target=x86_64-apple-darwin --release
cargo build --target=aarch64-apple-darwin --release
```

Run the [lipo](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/building-a-universal-macos-binary) tool to merge the two in one universal library.

```sh

> lipo -create -output target/release/libmy_lib.macos.dylib target/aarch64-apple-darwin/release/libmy_lib.dylib target/x86_64-apple-darwin/release/libmy_lib.dylib

Reviewer: Maybe split lines, therwise the reader needs to scroll horizontally. Like this it's also immediately visible that the only difference is the target name.

I'd also use `{ }` to identify the placeholders, so that it's obvious which part the user needs to replace. We already do this in other places with `{YourCrate}`, and like this it's consistent between tutorials. 

That is:

```suggestion
lipo -create -output target/release/lib{YourCrate}.macos.dylib \
    target/aarch64-apple-darwin/release/lib{YourCrate}.dylib \
    target/x86_64-apple-darwin/release/lib{YourCrate}.dylib
```

You could then replace `my_lib` on the whole page with `{YourCrate}`. A user can then substitute this very easily with their own crate name.

```

The result of this will be the file `target/release/libmy_lib.macos.dylib` that will now have support for both x64 and arm64 platforms.

Note: The name of your library will be the one you provided in `Cargo.toml` file, prefixed with `lib` and followed by `.dylib`:
```
[package]
name = "my_lib"

> ```

Reviewer: Given the above, you could also make this more general and mention that the user would replace `{myLib}` with the crate name.

The "Note:" prefix is probably not needed -- otherwise we would use admonish blocks (which interrupt the flow and are not appropriate here, I think).

Next, you will need to create the `.framework` folder.

```sh
mkdir target/release/libmy_lib.macos.framework
cp target/release/libmy_lib.macos.dylib target/release/libmy_lib.macos.framework/libmy_lib.macos.dylib
```

> Next, create the `Info.plist` file inside the `Resources` folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create the `Info.plist` file inside the `Resources` folder:
```

```sh
mkdir target/release/libmy_lib.macos.framework/Resources
```
File contents:
```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
	<key>CFBundleExecutable</key>
	<string>libmy_lib.macos.dylib</string>
	<key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
	<string>org.mywebsite.myapp</string>
	<key>CFBundleInfoDictionaryVersion</key>
	<string>6.0</string>
	<key>CFBundleName</key>
	<string>My App Name</string>
	<key>CFBundlePackageType</key>
	<string>FMWK</string>
	<key>CFBundleShortVersionString</key>
	<string>1.0.0</string>
	<key>CFBundleSupportedPlatforms</key>
	<array>
		<string>MacOSX</string>
	</array>

>     <key>NSHumanReadableCopyright</key>

Reviewer: This line is rendered strangely. It uses spaces while the other lines use tabs.

Could you use spaces everywhere?

	<string>Copyright (c)...</string>
	<key>CFBundleVersion</key>
	<string>1.0.0</string>
	<key>LSMinimumSystemVersion</key>
	<string>10.12</string>
</dict>
</plist>
```

> Note: The `CFBundleExecutable` name MUST match the dylib file name. Some of the contents in the XML file MUST not contain some characters. Generally avoid using anything other than letters and numbers. Related [stack overflow issue](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3757817/plist-contains-the-character).

Reviewer: This would be good to pack into an admonish block, you can search for "admonish note" in the book repo :slightly_smiling_face: 

Also, instead of "MUST" you can use bold "**must**".

"StackOverflow" should be capitalized as PascalCase.

Edit the project's `.gdextension` file to include support for iOS.
This file will probably be at `godot/{YourCrate}.gdextension`.

> The format will be similar to the following:

Reviewer: Should this not be in the next section "Building iOS lib" already?

Author: typo, had to say macOS instead of iOS here.

```ini
[libraries]
...
macos.release = "res://../rust/target/release/libmy_lib.macos.framework"
```

> ## Building iOS lib

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Building an iOS library
```

Add as target arm64 iOS.

```sh
rustup target add aarch64-apple-ios

> ```

Reviewer: Should have only 1 empty line between text and code block.

Build the library for both target architectures:

```sh
cargo build --target=aarch64-apple-ios --release

> ```

Reviewer: You mention "both", but only have one build command. Copy/paste mistake?

The result of this will be the file `target/aarch64-apple-ios/release/libmy_lib.dylib`.

Next, you will need to create the `.framework` folder.

```sh
mkdir target/release/libmy_lib.ios.framework
cp target/release/libmy_lib.ios.dylib target/release/libmy_lib.ios.framework/libmy_lib.ios.dylib
```

Next, create the `Info.plist` file inside the `.framework` folder

> File contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create the `Info.plist` file inside the `.framework` folder, with the following contents:
```

<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
	<key>CFBundleInfoDictionaryVersion</key>
	<string>6.0</string>
	<key>CFBundleDevelopmentRegion</key>
	<string>en</string>
	<key>CFBundleExecutable</key>
	<string>libmy_lib.ios.dylib</string>
	<key>CFBundleName</key>
	<string>My App Name</string>
	<key>CFBundleDisplayName</key>
	<string>My App Name</string>
	<key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
	<string>org.my-website.my-app</string>
	<key>NSHumanReadableCopyright</key>
	<string>Copyright (c) ...</string>
	<key>CFBundleVersion</key>
	<string>0.12.0</string>
	<key>CFBundleShortVersionString</key>
	<string>0.12.0</string>
	<key>CFBundlePackageType</key>
	<string>FMWK</string>
	<key>CSResourcesFileMapped</key>
	<true/>
	<key>DTPlatformName</key>
	<string>iphoneos</string>
	<key>MinimumOSVersion</key>
	<string>12.0</string>
</dict>
</plist>

```

Note: The `CFBundleExecutable` name MUST match the dylib file name. Some of the contents in the XML file MUST not contain some characters. Generally avoid using anything other than letters and numbers. Related [stack overflow issue](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3757817/plist-contains-the-character).

> 

Reviewer: It's not necessary to repeat this -- if your previous admonish-note box has a title, e.g. "XML format", you can directly link to that HTML anchor, e.g. 
```
See [XML format requirements](#xml-format).

Author: Doesn't seem to want to work with referencing by admonish title. Ideas how to fix? I know I can reference titles, but not sure why that doesnt work.

Reviewer: You can click on a section title (in rendered webpage), that should give you the anchor ID in the URL.

Author: Right, works for title of header, but the adonish one doesnt render for me locally(vscode)

Reviewer: Did you follow the installation instructions in the ReadMe?
```sh
cargo install mdbook mdbook-toc mdbook-admonish
```

If you hover over an admonish box's title, a § sign appears on the left:
![image](https://github.com/godot-rust/book/assets/708488/89d7f42a-6ffd-42b8-b464-7d7791bb6393)

Clicking this will give you a link to it.

Author: Ok, thanks, idk what I was expecting or thinking. It was in the README.md all along :D (instruction how to build). My bad.

Author: Ok, so linting fails, but the thing works. This is the href I get in link when I click that:
`#admonition-xml-format`
And I put that and it works in the browser. Hm..

Reviewer: Maybe it's a problem that admonitions aren't yet resolved (code-generated) at the time the lint runs, and the latter don't detect the anchor :thinking: 

I don't know an easy solution for this. We would need to run lints on post-processed Markdown code, which I'm not even sure if it's possible...

Otherwise just mention "above" without a link.

Author: Wrote above without link for now.

Edit the project's `.gdextension` file to include support for iOS.
This file will probably be at `godot/{YourCrate}.gdextension`.
The format will be similar to the following:

```ini
[libraries]
...
ios.release = "res://../rust/target/release/libmy_lib.ios.framework"
```

## Code Signing and Notarizing (macOS only)

> Note: This step is only needed if you want to share the library. If you are building the whole game, you will sign everything and don't need to sign the library. You can skip this step.

Reviewer: Admonish note :slightly_smiling_face:

> In order to Code Sign and Notarize your app, you will first need to gather some stuff from your Apple Developer Enrolled Account. We will put them each in an environment variable and use a script to sign, so it's easier to run. Here are the environment variables needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to code-sign and notarize your app, you will first need to gather some information from your enrolled Apple Developer account. We will create corresponding environment variables and use a script to sign, so it's easier to run. Here are the environment variables needed:
```

> - APPLE_CERT_BASE64
> - APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD
> - APPLE_DEV_ID
> - APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID
> - APPLE_DEV_PASSWORD
> - APPLE_DEV_APP_ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `APPLE_CERT_BASE64`
- `APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD`
- `APPLE_DEV_ID`
- `APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID`
- `APPLE_DEV_PASSWORD`
- `APPLE_DEV_APP_ID`
```

> Firstly, make sure to enroll your Apple ID to Developer Program:
> 
> - Create an Apple ID if you don’t have one already.
> - Use your Apple ID to register in the Apple Developer Program by going to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com)
> - Accept all agreements from the Apple Developer Page.

Reviewer: Articles, periods and standard apostrophes `'` instead of stylized ones `’`. 

```suggestion
Firstly, make sure to enroll your Apple ID to the Developer Program:

- Create an Apple ID if you don't have one already.
- Use your Apple ID to register in the Apple Developer Program by going to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com).
- Accept all agreements from the Apple Developer Page.
```

> ### APPLE_DEV_ID - Apple ID

Reviewer: Would be nice to backtick the variable names everywhere :slightly_smiling_face: 
```suggestion
### `APPLE_DEV_ID` - Apple ID
```

Your email used for your Apple ID.
```
APPLE_DEV_ID = email@provider.com
```
### APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID - Apple Team ID

Go to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com). Go to account.

Go to membership details. Copy Team ID.
```
APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID = 1ABCD23EFG
```
### APPLE_DEV_PASSWORD - Apple App-Specific Password

Create Apple App-Specific Password. Copy the password.
```
APPLE_DEV_PASSWORD = abcd-abcd-abcd-abcd
```

> ### APPLE_CERT_BASE64 and APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD and APPLE_DEV_APP_ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `APPLE_CERT_BASE64`, `APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD` and `APPLE_DEV_APP_ID`
```

Go to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com). Go to account.

Go to certificates.

Click on + at Certificates tab. Create Developer ID Application. Click Continue.

> Leave profile type as is. Create a certificate signing request from a mac. You can use your own name and email address. Save the file to disk. You will get a file called CertificateSigningRequest.certSigningRequest. Upload it to the Developer ID Application request. Click Continue.
> 
> Download the certificate. You will get a file developerID_application.cer.
> 
> On a Mac, right click and select open. Add it to the login keychain. In the Keychain Access app that opened, login Keychain tab, go to Keys, sort by date modified, expand your key (the key should have name you entered at common name Common Name), right click the expanded certificate, get info, and copy the text at Details -> Subject Name -> Common Name. Eg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leave profile type as is. Create a certificate signing request from a Mac. You can use your own name and email address. Save the file to disk. You will get a file called `CertificateSigningRequest.certSigningRequest`. Upload it to the Developer ID Application request. Click Continue.

Download the certificate. You will get a file `developerID_application.cer`.

On a Mac, right click and select open. Add it to the login keychain. In the Keychain Access app that opened, log into Keychain tab, go to Keys, sort by date modified, and expand your key (the key should have the name you entered at _Common Name_). Right click the expanded certificate, get info, and copy the text at _Details -> Subject Name -> Common Name_. For example:
```

```
APPLE_DEV_APP_ID = Developer ID Application: Common Name (1ABCD23EFG)
```

> Then, select the certificate, right click and click export. At file format select p12. When exporting, set a password for the certificate. This will be APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD. You will get a Certificates.p12 file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, select the certificate, right click and click export. At file format select `p12`. When exporting, set a password for the certificate. This will be the value of `APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD`. You will get a `Certificates.p12` file.
```

> Eg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```
APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD = <password_set_when_exporting_p12>
```
Then you need to make a base64 file out of it, by running:
```
base64 -i Certificates.p12 -o Certificates.base64
```

> Copy the contents of the generated file: Eg.
> APPLE_CERT_BASE64 = ...(A long text file)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy the contents of the generated file, e.g.:
APPLE_CERT_BASE64 = ...(A long text file)
```
And code-tags on the 2nd line

After these secrets are obtained, all that remains is to set them as environment variables. Afterwards you can use the following script for signing [ci-sign-macos.ps1](https://github.com/appsinacup/godot-rapier-physics/blob/main/scripts/ci-sign-macos.ps1). In order to run this script you will need to install [powershell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/) on your Mac.
```powershell
ci-sign-macos.ps1 target/release/my_lib.framework
```

## Godot Build

> After building the libraries you can now distribute them as they are, or build the whole game using Godot. For that follow Godot's how to export guide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After building the libraries, you can now distribute them as they are, or build the whole game using Godot. For that, follow Godot's _How to export_ guide:
```

If you are building the whole game, you will sign everything and don't need to sign the library. You can skip to [Godot Build](#godot-build) step.
```

In order to code-sign and notarize your app, you will first need to gather some information from your enrolled Apple Developer account.
We will create corresponding environment variables and use a script to sign, so it's easier to run. Here are the environment variables needed:

- `APPLE_CERT_BASE64`
- `APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD`
- `APPLE_DEV_ID`
- `APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID`
- `APPLE_DEV_PASSWORD`
- `APPLE_DEV_APP_ID`

Firstly, make sure to enroll your Apple ID to the Developer Program:

- Create an Apple ID if you don't have one already.
- Use your Apple ID to register in the Apple Developer Program by going to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com).
- Accept all agreements from the Apple Developer Page.

### `APPLE_DEV_ID` - Apple ID

Your email used for your Apple ID.

```sh
APPLE_DEV_ID = email@provider.com
```

### APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID - Apple Team ID

Go to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com). Go to account.

Go to membership details. Copy Team ID.

```sh
APPLE_DEV_TEAM_ID = 1ABCD23EFG
```

> ### APPLE_DEV_PASSWORD - Apple App-Specific Password

Reviewer: Backticks for **all** variables, in both titles :wink:

You will get a file called `CertificateSigningRequest.certSigningRequest`. Upload it to the Developer ID Application request. Click Continue.

Download the certificate. You will get a file `developerID_application.cer`.

On a Mac, right click and select open. Add it to the login keychain.
In the Keychain Access app that opened, log into Keychain tab, go to Keys, sort by date modified,
and expand your key (the key should have the name you entered at _Common Name_).
Right click the expanded certificate, get info, and copy the text at _Details -> Subject Name -> Common Name_. For example:

```sh
APPLE_DEV_APP_ID = Developer ID Application: Common Name (1ABCD23EFG)
```

Then, select the certificate, right click and click export. At file format select `p12`. When exporting, set a password for the certificate.
This will be the value of `APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD`. You will get a `Certificates.p12` file.

For example:

```sh
APPLE_CERT_PASSWORD = <password_set_when_exporting_p12>
```

Then you need to make a base64 file out of it, by running:

```sh
base64 -i Certificates.p12 -o Certificates.base64
```

Copy the contents of the generated file, e.g.:

> APPLE_CERT_BASE64 = ...(A long text file)

Reviewer: Like I wrote before, 2nd line should be in code tags.

After these secrets are obtained, all that remains is to set them as environment variables.
Afterwards you can use the following script

> for signing [ci-sign-macos.ps1](https://github.com/appsinacup/godot-rapier-physics/blob/main/scripts/ci-sign-macos.ps1).

Reviewer: Running random scripts from a third-party repository is both a bit insecure and brittle. It will break as soon as someone changes file name/path, and people can introduce code at any time.

The fact that the script has *zero* comments and is itself a fork of https://github.com/godot-jolt/godot-jolt/blob/master/scripts/ci_sign_macos.ps1 doesn't make it more trustworthy, either.

Is this the easiest/best way? Are there official resources that it can be complemented with?

Author: There is a tool, fastlane, which can be used. However I haven't used it, and for my use cases I needed a script as I wanted it automated.

I would propose adding it inline then, and we can give credits to the original script.

Reviewer: What does the godot-rapier-physics version change compared to the godot-jolt one?

Author: I guess I was not owner of that repo, so thats why I didnt put that, as I tested this version of script and I would know what happens to it. I also put some of the logic in the godot-cpp-template repo and credited godot-jolt repo.

Could do same here, copy paste contents of script? It's basically some steps that are tedious to do by hand. Most people however if they do this, they would not do this step, if they build from godot(eg. godot automated this signing step). So this is only for people who export the lib as is, and those people might anyway use github actions for that. For that use case I could just give a reusable external action, eg. https://github.com/godotengine/godot-cpp-template/blob/main/.github/actions/sign/action.yml

Author: I could describe the steps individually and not use the script in this tutorial, and credit the creator somewhere.

Reviewer: I think it's OK to link to an external script if it's somewhat reputed (like godot-jolt). We should just add a disclaimer that the user is responsible for the security and up-to-dateness.

As for describing the script's step, I'm not sure if that doesn't widen the scope of the tutorial too much. Given that the script is already quite long, explaining it would be its own huge page in the book, no?

Author: Ok, looking at the jolt one, looks it has less flag's on some commands, but probably works just as well. My only fear if linking to that and if it doesn't work, would be hard to change that.

That being said, updating with that script, if anything it's a good starting point for people willing do signing by hand (that step is optional if you build a game for eg, it's only needed in case you want to export the lib as is)
